[Tomoya] Ushio, let me tell
you a little story
about something that happened
before you were born.
Actually you might say this
is the story about how you were
born.
You see, Mommy and Daddy
first became friends in our
senior year of high school.
[Ushio] Is that
when you two met?
[Tomoya] That's right. Back
then, we didn't even know each
others' names.
Anpan!
[Nagisa] Do you like
this school?
I have to say that I love it
very, very much. But soon
everything changes.
Well at least it
does eventually.
[Nagisa] Fun things,
happythings, they'll all...
They'll all eventually change
someday you know.
Can you still love this place?
[Tomoya] Just go and find more.
All you have to do is find
other fun and happy things.
Come on, let's go.
[Tomoya] That was the first
time that Mommy and Daddy ever
talked to each other.
At the time, Mommy
was a year older
than the other
kids at school.
What did... So what did
you want?
Nothing really. I was just
wondering why you were here
eating lunch alone.
Let me ask you. Do you like this
school very much?
Not especially...
I love this school very,
very much.
I used to have friends I could
talk to and teachers I was close
to.
But now it's just...
Did something happen?
It's just that I was out of
school for a long time last
year, so everything's different.
And I...
Have to take the year over?
Yes, I'm a repeater.
Everybody that I knew
hasgraduated and gone on to
their lives. So there isn't
anyone I know here anymore.
It's kind of weird, but I feel
a little like Rip Van Winkle.
[Tomoya] Daddy was an outcast
at school.
But after I met Mommy, bit by
bit, things began to change.
My whole life started
to turn around.
You see, Mommy wanted to put
on a play.
But first, she had to bring
back the school's Drama
Club.
That wasn't going
to be easy.
[Ushio] But you helped
her out, right?
[Tomoya] I sure did.
It really meant a lot to
your mommy...
so I couldn't just ignore
her problem.
You know, Mommy loved the Big
Dango Family even back then.
Ushio, you like them, too,
don't you?
[Ushio] Uh-huh.
Before the formed the club,
Mommy used to practice all by
herself.
That play was very
important to her.
If you'd like, I'll take
you there...
to a special place in town where
all your wishes come true.
[Tomoya] So we started making
friends to join the club.
The first person to help us
out was Kyou Fujibayashi.
You know her, right? She's
your kindergarten teacher.
We can't! How can I put this?
I-I mean it's not like we're
even going out or anything.
And besides, what about Ryou?
Just stop right there! Listen!
Please, just think this over
for a second.
I know you're a guy so you
probably want to do these kinds
of things...
[Tomoya] And then there was
her sister, Ryou
Fujibayashi.
She was the class rep
for Daddy's class.
I do understand. I'll listen
to you seriously.
We're starting to look more and
more like a real drama club.
I think girls are genetically
predisposed to be interested in
fortune-telling.
[Tomoya] The smartest girl in
the whole school also joined
us.
Kotomi Ichinose.
She was Daddy's
childhood friend.
It's divine...
[Tomoya] We made lots
of other friends too.
Like a junior named
Tomoyo Sakagami.
As they say, the road goes on
and on. Let's both give it our
best.
[Tomoyo] Make it a promise.
[Tomoya] And Misae Sagara,
the dorm mother...
And then there was
Yukine Miyazawa,
who was always hanging out in
the reference room and giving us
advice.
Miyazawa told us about an old
town legend that's been passed
down for generations.
According to the legend, when
someone achieves true happiness,
a ball of light appears.
If you catch one of them,
then it can make a wish come
true.
[Ushio] What about
Uncle Youhei?
[Tomoya] Oh yeah, he was
there, too.
It's part of the deadly game
we all know too well...
A game of love! A boy's love
game you might say!
[Tomoya] I worked hard withhis
little sister, Mei, to try and
get him back on the soccer
team.
I really owe him one.
If he hadn't been around...
Daddy probably would have
dropped out of school before he
met Mommy.
We all went our separate ways
after graduation, but we still
meet up from time to time.
I guess you know that already
though, don't you?
You saw everyone when they
came over for New Year's.
A whole bunch of other stuff
happened before we brought back
the Drama Club.
For example, Kouko Ibuki and
Yuusuke Yoshino got married.
Kouko had a younger sister
who was in the hospital but
she's better now.
That's your friend, Fuko.
We had to do more than just
look for club members.
We also had to find a teacher
who would help take care of the
club.
Unfortunately, the teacher we
needed was already the advisor
of the Choir Club.
Then things got complicated
and we had to challenge the
Basketball Club...
to a match to show the Choir
Club how serious we were.
In the end, everything worked
out and Kyou and Sunohara joined
the Drama Club.
Thanks to all the help wehad
from our friends, the club was
finally on its way to
recovery...
That was good for Mommy, but
Daddy still had his own problems
to deal with.
[Tomoya] Dad, if you're going to
sleep you should move to your
bed.
Come on, Dad. Wake up.
Oh, well look at this, will you?
It seems that I've caused you
such trouble again, Tomoya.
[Tomoya] Back then, Daddy
didn't get along with Grandpa
very well.
I got really mad and left
home. That's when I went to live
with Mommy's family.
Goodbye, Dad. So long.
[sniffle]
You don't like my pastries?
My homemade pastries...?
[Tomoya] J-Just a... [Sanae] So
it's plain to see why they
haven't sold!
[Tomoya] Like mother like
daughter, I guess...
I hope her father is normal,
at least.
[Akio] Hey...!
What is it?
You said something you
shouldn't have.
[Tomoya] Sanae and Akki don't
need any introduction of
course.
One time, Akki had Daddyand
all his friends play baseball
with him. That was a real
mess...
Sanae and Akki welcomed me
into their home with open arms
from the very start.
Daddy never had a family like
that growing up, so it was all
new to him.
I have to admit, I didn't
quite know how to act at first
but I tried my best to fit
in.
At the time, I didn't
understand why Sanae and Akki
helped me.
But I'm glad they did.
You know, Mommy used to get
real sick sometimes.
When she was in high school,
she would get a fever and have
to miss class.
But Akki and Sanae were
always there to take care of her
until she got better.
[Akio] But that's the truth for
you. It's always harsh, isn't
it?
[Tomoya] The school festival
was right around the corner.
Daddy and his friends had
a lot to put together.
Sound, lighting,
costumes... everything.
But right before the play,
something unexpected
happened.
[Tomoya] Those pictures...
I found a bunch of old
photo albums and diaries...
I can't believe it. I had no
idea at all, Okazaki...
Dad used to be an actor when
he was younger.
He gave it up because of me,
didn't he? They both gave up
their dreams for me!
[sobbing]
[Sunohara] This is bad.
Let's drop the curtain.
Make your dream come
true, Nagisa!
[Kyou] What the-?!
[Tomoya] Old man?!
Nagisa! Are you stupid or what?!
[Akio] A child's dream is
their parent's dream!
You can make it come
true for us!
Don't you realize that our dream
is to watch you live out yours?!
Your mom and I didn't give up
our dreams at all!
You get it, Nagisa?!
You are our dream!
That's what being parents
is about!
That's what being a family
is all about!
Since then... ever since
that day,
we've been baking our bread...
Waiting, longing for today
to come!
If you get discouraged and give
up now, then our dream dies, you
got that?!
This is your responsibility
now, get it?!
[deep breaths]
If you'd like...
If you'd like, shall I take you?
To the place in town where
wishes come true?
Take us there, Nagisa.
Take all of us.
[applause]
[Tomoya] In the end, the play
was a big success.
[Ushio] What was it about?
[Tomoya] It was about a girl
who lived in a world that had
ended.
We don't know the title of
the story or who it was written
by.
We don't even
know how it ends.
When we looked for the story
in a book, we couldn't find
it.
Mommy said that she probably
heard it from someone when she
was little.
The strange thing is, somehow
Daddy felt like he knew that
story, too.
[Ushio] Ooh.
[Tomoya] That day, after the
play was finished, Daddy finally
asked Mommy out.
And we promised that we would
stay with each other
forever.
Something terrible happened
right before graduation.
Mommy got very sick and she
wasn't able to finish school
with Daddy.
I was really shocked.
I don't want to graduate now.
I just want to stay with you.
[Nagisa] Tomoya.
You can't hold yourself back
over something silly like that.
If you have a chance to move on,
then you should take it.
[Nagisa] I want you to move on.
Okay?
[Tomoya] After graduation,
Daddy helped out Sanae and Akki
at the bakery for a little
while.
I was happy to work for them,
but I knew I couldn't rely on
their kindness forever.
That's why I asked Yoshino to
get me a job at the electric
company he worked for.
It was rough at first. Daddy
made a lot of mistakes.
If it was the old me, I
probably would've given up.
But I was living a different
life then before.
I had Mommy to cheer me on.
And Sanae and Akki to encourage
me.
And the other people at work
to teach me.
I had a family.
In the meantime, Mommy worked
hard and kept going to
school.
And then something
happened...
Suddenly, Daddy got an
offerto transfer to a big
company where he could make a
lot of money.
But something bad happened
with Grandpa and I didn't get
the job after all.
Daddy was very upset. I felt
like running away from this
town.
But thankfully, Mommy
was there to help me.
That's when I
proposed to her.
But there were still a
fewthings that needed to be
settled before we could get
married.
Though Mommy finished school,
she got sick and couldn't attend
her graduation.
But then all her friends got
together and we held a special
ceremony just for her.
IT wasn't long after that
when Mommy and Daddy finally got
married.
Mommy moved in
with Daddy,
and soon, she had a baby
in her tummy.
That's when you enter
the story, Ushio.
[Ushio] Hmmm?
But we had a tough time
before you were born.
Mommy got sick again and
everyone was worried about
her.
I spoke with the doctor theother
day and he said there may be
some risks we don't know about
when she gives birth.
And just for the record,
I haven't told Nagisa, yet.
The doctor told me in private
but you should know too.
[Tomoya] When Daddy was
worried and depressed,
Akki told him a story about
Mommy from a long time ago.
One day, when Mommy was so
sick that they thought she was
going to die,
he took her to a place in
town where suddenly all the
trees surronded her.
Then, like a miracle, she
started to get better. It was as
if the town itself had saved
her.
Ushio? Ushio?
She fell asleep, huh?
I have a strange memory.
I haven't told Ushio about it
because I don't know if she
would understand.
I don't quite
understand myself.
But even if it doesn't make
any sense, I have a
memory...
of Nagisa dying when Ushio
was born.
Afterwards, I asked
theFurukawas to take care of
Ushio, and lived a miserable
life by myself.
But everything changed the
summer when Ushio was five years
old...
We took a trip that Sanaehad
planned, and headed to a very
important place I had forgotten
about...
There, my grandmother told me
all sorts of things.
About me, about my father,
and about my parents' life
before I was born.
On the way back home, I told
Ushio all sorts of things
too.
Things about her mother and
how much I loved her.
After years and years of hard
work, my father returned home to
live with my grandmother.
I planned to take Ushio to
see them after he had some time
to recover.
Eventually, Ushio and I began
living together.
Kyou was Ushio's
kindergarten teacher.
Ushio became
friends with Fuko.
Everything was going well.
But then...
Suddenly...
What's wrong, Ushio?
I tried, but I couldn't do it
by myself.
Huh?
Come on! What's wrong?!
[Tomoya] I felt like I was
trapped inside a nightmare that
would never end.
Of course, the Ushio
I know now is fine.
She's never gotten sick or
anything like that.
But the Ushio of that world
never recovered.
And just like Nagisa, she
died of her strange illness.
At that moment, something
incredible happened.
[crying]
Before I realized it, Nagisa
was right in front of me.
I had returned to the day
when Ushio was born five years
before...
It's a strange story.
But as strange as it was, I
believe that it really
happened.
I met Nagisa in this town and
Ushio was born in this town.
I made friends with many
people in this town, and
experienced many things in this
town.
And all the people who live
here will continue to support
each other.
And continue to live their
lives the best way they can.
[Tomoya] Ushio, Fuko, you're
going to catch a cold. Time to
wake up, okay?
[Nagisa] Shio-chan, Daddy,
Fu-chan! Come on you guys, let's
go home.
Mommy!